We've discussed before how GMSL2
is a purely packet based
transport system.
A GM SL2 link operates at a
fixed bit rate, usually 3 or 6
Gbps, and that bit stream is
filled with packets, video
packets, audio packets, control
packets, authentication
packets, synchronization
packets, or in a pinch, idle
packets.
The job of the GMSL2 layer in the
Serializer within is to take all
these data sources, audio, status
sync, and of course video, and
Multiplex them as packets onto
the GMSL2 stream.
It also manages the reverse
channel.
It takes the stream coming from
the Deserializer in the reverse
direction and decodes control
information, reverse audio, and,
well, anything else that's needed
At the Deserializer, the job is
reversed in the forward
direction.
Video, audio, status,
synchronization, and well,
whatever else is sent is sorted
and sent to the appropriate
places, and control and reverse
audio and other data that's
bound for the Serializer is
packetized and sent on the
reverse channel.
Today I want to focus on that
part of the Serializer and the
Deserializer that sits between
the video interfaces and the
GMSL2 packet machine.
That's the part of the system we
call the video pipe, and there's
a lot more going on in there than
you might think.
That makes sense when you think
about it.
As long as the video is
packetized, there's not much you
can do with it.
But once the video is extracted
from its interface envelope and
before it's packed into the GMSL2
envelope, there it is in all its
pixel by pixel glory, just
waiting for you to do something.
Here's a diagram of a Serializer
Deserializer pair with all the
GMSL stuff removed, just the
interfaces and the video pieces.
In this case, the interfaces are
both CSI-2, and by now you
understand kind of what's going
on there.
a CSI-2 port connects to one or
more CSI-2 PHY blocks that
ultimately feed a CSI-2
controller.
It's the controller that finally
unpacks CSI-2 packets and creates
the video stream along with
ancillary information like
synchronization and passes it
along the video stream, then
enters one of the video pipes.
Something happens in there.
It's not just an empty pipe, and
what comes out is a video
stream.
Now, it may be somewhat different
than what went into the pipe, and
that's what we're going to talk
about today.
Then, through the magic of GMSL2,
the video stream appears on the
Deserializer side.
Yes, we know that it's been
turned into packets and then
unpacked, but for now, let's
just consider all that
technology.
Just a wire on the Deserializer
side, The video stream enters
another pipeline.
Then after the video stream exits
the pipeline, it's passed to one
or more of the CSI-2 controllers,
where the video stream is
repackaged into CSI-2 packets,
and then on to the PHY section,
and finally out one of the two
CSI-2 ports.
Now, what's inside those video
pipelines and what makes them so
special that we need 4 of them?
1st, if the pixel stream is
protected by HTCP encryption, the
stream must be decrypted.
And also if the video content
needs to be protected over the
GMSL2 link, it will need to be
encrypted on the way out of the
pipeline.
So that's the first thing.
The second thing is that
depending on the kind of signal
we're processing, the individual
bits in each pixel may be wildly
out of order.
What I mean is this, we'd like to
have everything in a nice RGB 888
sequence.
That is, I'd like to see 8-bits
for the red subpixel, 8-bits for
the green subpixel, and eight
bits for the blue subpixel, in
that order.
But some interfaces just don't
cooperate.
I mean, think about OLDI.
It delivers 47 bit words per
pixel time slot, and the bits are
just all over creation.
Well, that's why most GMSL2 parts
include a video crossbar in the
video pipe.
It can reorder the bits of each
pixel so that what takes place in
the subsequent processing all
works correctly.
Now we may have a block that adds
a watermark to the stream.
It works like this.
We can change the value of the
least significant bit on some of
the pixels to create a
detectable, robust dynamic
watermark.
Changing the LSB doesn't really
change the visible picture in any
detectable way, but if for
whatever reason the picture
freezes and it's getting the same
frame over and over, the
Deserializer can detect that the
watermark isn't changing and can
flag an error.
Generating and detecting the
watermark occurs in the video
pipe.
Next comes a block that's a
little unintuitive, but really
useful.
In some HDMI and DSI systems,
the SoC may generate a single
video stream that consists of
two video segments presented
side by side.
In this example, the total frame
size is 38140 pixels by 1200
pixels, and hey, that's a very
wide picture, but it consists of
two HD video images side by side.
By combining the videos in this
way, the SoC needs only one HDMI
or DSI port to send 2 HD video
streams, but the Serializer needs
to split these videos into two
separate video streams.
And that's what Dual View does.
And it's a really flexible block
that can split video streams left
right like I'm showing here, or
pixel interleaved or Lion
interleaved or even asymmetric
sizes.
As I said, the Dual view block is
very flexible, a little
unintuitive, but can help save
hardware costs if you only need a
single interface.
Back to the SoC, a reasonable
question is what does it do with
the two video streams the dual
view controllers just created?
I mean it looks to me as though
the video pipe has just one input
and one output.
Well the answer to that question
is coming up, so don't worry.
Next comes alpha channel
management.
Now the alpha channel in a video
stream manages the level of
transparency of certain portions
of the image.
For example, if I wanted to
implement a picture in picture
function, I could start with the
image that I want to overlay
down, sample it to the size I
want, then make the remaining
background, let's say black,
create an alpha mask, then apply
the alpha mask to the down
sampled image.
This is the result.
The down sampled image appears
with a black border in the corner
of the background image.
Since the alpha channel is just
another video channel along with
the color channels, you can
apply animations in the alpha
channel and as long as the video
stays in the RGB A domain, it's
easy.
The last element in the video
pipe is a round of HDCP
encryption if it's required,
and after that it's off to the
GMSL2 stage to be cut into
packets and transmitted down
the GMSL chain.
So you see that everything that
has to happen to the video stream
as a video stream happens in the
video pipe.
The rest of the time the video
stream is chopped up into
packets, either 36 pixel GMSL
packets or one single video line
CSI packets or maybe something
else.
Now the big question is how does
the video get from its source to
the video pipe and how does the
video stream from each video pipe
get routed to the correct pipe in
the Deserializer?
Well, that last question is easy
to answer.
On its way out of the video pipe,
as the stream is packetized,
every packet is tagged with a
stream ID on the Deserializer
side.
At the input to each receiver
pipe, you tune into the stream ID
that you want to receive.
And if 2 receiver pipes tune to
the same stream ID, well then the
stream is effectively duplicated.
And by the way, that's how dual
view can generate 2 separate
streams from a single side by
side input.
It just tags the left half and
the right half with two separate
stream IDs and the Deserializer
takes care of the rest.
But the other part, how the video
stream gets from the source to
the video pipe, depends strongly
on what kind of video source it
is we're talking about.
If it's something relatively
simple, like OLDI, then the path
is also pretty simple.
The traffic lanes are decoded
into their constituents subpixels
and sent to one of the video
pipes.
But if it's a more complex input
arrangement like CSI-2, then
we're dealing with a number of
interacting factors.
The port configuration of the
Serializer, data type and virtual
channel of the incoming video
stream IDs can be given as
examples.
Let's take a CSI-2 Serializer for
example.
This part has a single CSI-2 port
that can be configured as one by
four or as two by two.
That is, it can be configured as
a single port of four lanes or as
a pair of two lane ports.
Now remember, a port is very
different from a PHY.
The port consists of a set of
pins that converts the various
CSI voltage levels to something
that the device can handle, while
a PHY converts the state of the
pins into a bit stream.
And that means, for example, AC
PHY, which has multiple bits
encoded into more than two
external levels, is converted
into a binary stream by the PHY
block.
This part for example, there are
4-5 blocks, but only two are
actually used, five block one and
five block 2.
The stream coming out of the
five ports consists of CSI-2
packets.
The CSI controller accepts those
packets and assigns them to a
pipeline by default, in this case
Pipeline Z.
Now the thing to know here is
that CSI-2 is a complete protocol
stack and ACSI packet stream can
contain multiple data types and
multiple virtual channels.
The pipeline can select which
data types and which virtual
channels to accept and can even
convert 1 data type or virtual
channel to another, a kind of
filter on the front end if you
will.
Once the particular data type and
virtual channel are selected, the
rest of the video, IE is just
dealing with Ixels and OS out at
the end, ready to be tagged with
a stream ID and acketized over in
the Deserializer.
The pipeline receives the GMSL
packets that match the program
stream ID and processes the video
stream in, well, something of a
reverse order from the
Serializer.
If there's HDCP encryption, the
stream is decrypted.
The alpha channel, if it exists,
is added back in.
Another step that may be taken is
to remap the colors.
Some parts have a color lookup
table to add, for example, gamma
correction to the stream from the
pipeline.
The stream is tagged with the
appropriate CSI-2 virtual channel
number, packetized in the CSI-2
controller, and passed to the
thigh and on out to the port.
Now, before we wrap up, let's
take a look at the block diagram
of a typical part.
Here's the MAX96717 CSI-2 to
GMSL2 Serializer.
It has a single CSI-2 input and a
single GMSL2 port.
So how many video pipes does this
part contain?
Well, just looking at the block
diagram, it's not obvious.
I mean there is no block labeled
video pipeline, but I promise you
it's in there.
Let's think about this for a
moment.
Out of the CSI-2 interface, the
signal splits into either a CSI-2
tunnel block or a CSI-2 to pixel
stream block.
Now, if tunneling is engaged, we
can just stop right there.
There's nothing I can do to the
video stream because I can't
actually see the video stream.
It's packed inside a set of CSI-2
packets, and the rest of the
GMSL2 protocol just doesn't speak
CSI-2.
The best I can do is to treat the
CSI-2 packets as just so much raw
data, package them just as they
are into GMSL packets, and then
send them on their way.
But if I'm selecting the CSI-2 to
pixel stream path, well now I can
perform the standard operations
on the video stream.
Now in this part, there isn't
much machinery in the pipeline.
There is no dual view, no
watermarking, and no HDCP
encryption or decryption.
But there is the ability to
reassign CSI, two data types and
virtual channels, and there's a
retiming buffer that ensures the
smooth flow of data through the
pipeline.
And for this part, that's all you
really need.
So where exactly does the video
pipeline logic live?
In the block diagram?
It's in that block, right in the
middle, GMSL2 video and control
data routing.
One small part of that little
rectangle is the video pipeline
that operates when the device is
running in pixel mode.
But that's in addition to all the
other logic that the data sheet
authors combined into that little
block.
The control information flow, the
packetizing, the FIFO, the the
scheduling, all of that is in
there as well.
But when you're thinking about
how to configure a GMSL2
Serializer or Deserializer, don't
forget the piece that does so
much useful work in the video
stream, the video pipeline.